README.md, before:

# 📅 Filament Nepali Date Time Support

[![Latest Version on Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime)
[![Filament v4](https://img.shields.io/badge/Filament-v4-ffba00?style=flat-square)](https://filamentphp.com/)
[![Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime)

A FilamentPHP plugin that adds support for Nepali Date (Bikram Sambat - BS) in Filament’s form, infolist and table components.
![Banner](.github/screenshots/banner.jpg)

## Installation

Require the package using Composer:

```bash
composer require rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime
```

---

## Screenshots

### Nepali DateTime Picker in Form

![Nepali DateTime Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-3.png)
![Nepali DateTime Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-4.png)

### Nepali Date Picker in Form

![Nepali Date Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-1.png)
![Nepali Date Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-2.png)

### Nepali Functions

![Nepali Functions](.github/screenshots/textentry-1.png)
![Nepali Functions](.github/screenshots/textentry-2.png)

---

## Usage

To use `NepaliDate`, please refer to the documentation of [`NepaliDate`](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1/NepalIDatePHP).

### 1. NepaliDateTimePicker

> [!WARNING]  
> If you are using `timestamp` and `datetime` column type consider using [`ADAsNepaliDate`](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1/NepalIDatePHP/blob/main/docs/LARAVEL.md#cast-attribute-to-nepalidate) cast in model.

It extends Filament [DateTimePicker](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/date-time-picker) to support **Nepali Date (BS)**.

```php
use RohanAdhikari\FilamentNepaliDatetime\NepaliDatetimePicker;
use RohanAdhikari\FilamentNepaliDatetime\NepaliDatePicker;

NepaliDatetimePicker::make('dob')
    ->label('Date of Birth (BS)')
    ->weekStartsOnSaturday()
    ->dehydrateStateInNepali()
    ->locale(NepaliDate::NEPALI)
    ->maxDate(NepaliDate::now())
    ->minDate(now()->subYear(20)), // Suport NepaliDate/ Carbon / Nepalidate string

    //or for date only
NepaliDatePicker::make('dob')
    ->format('d-m-Y')
    ->locale(NepaliDate::NEPALI)
    ->maxDate(NepaliDate::now()),

```

### Configuring the locale

The picker supports two locales:

-   `'en'` – English
-   `'np'` – Nepali

```php
NepaliDatetimePicker::make('dob')
    ->locale(NepaliDate::NEPALI);
```

### Configuring the first day of the week

Similar to [Filament Datetime Picker](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/date-time-picker#configuring-the-first-day-of-the-week). New convenient helper method is added.

```php
NepaliDatePicker::make('dob')
    ->weekStartsOnSaturday()
```

### Saving Date in Nepali Format

By Default, Datetime is saved in english format even locale is 'np'. You can configure it to save in **Nepali Unicode** in the database.

> [!WARNING]  
> In Laravel migrations, **don’t use** `timestamp` for Nepali dates. Instead, use `string`, because `timestamp` and `datetime` cannot store Unicode characters.

> [!NOTE]  
> If you are using any cast from [`NepaliDate`](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1/NepalIDatePHP) in model, date will automatically be converted to the English locale.

```php
NepaliDatetimePicker::make('dob')
    ->dehydrateStateInNepali()
```

---

### Methods Supporting NepaliDate

These methods support **NepaliDate**, **Carbon**, or **NepaliDate string**:

| Method                 | Description                                                  | Example Usage                                          |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `defaultFocusedDate()` | Sets the default date when the picker opens                  | `->defaultFocusedDate(NepaliDate::now())`              |
| `disabledDates()`      | Disables specific dates (array of Carbon/NepaliDate/strings) | `->disabledDates([NepaliDate::now(),now()->addDay()])` |
| `maxDate()`            | Sets the maximum selectable date                             | `->maxDate(NepaliDate::now())`                         |
| `minDate()`            | Sets the minimum selectable date                             | `->minDate(now()->subYear(20))`                        |

---

### DatePicker Key Bindings

The DatePicker supports keyboard navigation for accessibility and ease of use.

#### Navigation

-   **Arrow Left** → Move focus to the previous day
-   **Arrow Right** → Move focus to the next day
-   **Arrow Up** → Move focus to the same week day in the previous week
-   **Arrow Down** → Move focus to the same week day in the next week

#### Month / Year Shortcuts

-   **Alt + Arrow Left** → Focus the previous month
-   **Alt + Arrow Right** → Focus the next month
-   **Alt + Arrow Up** → Focus the previous year
-   **Alt + Arrow Down** → Focus the next year

#### Page Navigation

-   **Page Up** → Previous month
-   **Page Down** → Next month
-   **Shift + Page Up** → Previous year
-   **Shift + Page Down** → Next year

#### Week Navigation

-   **Home** → Jump to the start of the week
-   **End** → Jump to the end of the week

#### Selection & Clearing

-   **Enter** → Select the currently focused day
-   **Backspace / Delete / Clear** → Clear the selected date

---

### 2. Nepali Functions

The following functions are available on TextColumn and TextEntry.

### `nepaliDate()`

Formats a stored **BS (Bikram Sambat)** date into English or Nepali locale.

> [!NOTE]  
> This does **not** convert AD → BS.
> If you want conversion, use [`toNepaliDate()`](#tonepalidate).

```php
TextColumn::make('dob')
    ->nepaliDate(
        locale: 'np'
    );
    //or
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->nepaliDateTime(
        locale: 'en'
    );
        //or
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->nepaliTime(
        locale: 'en'
    );
```

| Argument   | Type                              | Default                | Description                           |
| ---------- | --------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `format`   | `string \| Closure \| null`       | default(from filament) | Output format (BS).                   |
| `timezone` | `string \| Closure \| null`       | `null`                 | Timezone for displaying date.         |
| `locale`   | `string('en' or 'np') \| Closure` | `'en'`                 | Language/locale for formatted output. |

---

### `toNepaliDate()`

Converts a stored AD date into BS date, then formats it.

```php
// Table Column
TextColumn::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliDate(format: 'd M, Y', locale: 'np');
// Infolist Text Entry
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliDate(format: 'd M, Y', locale: 'en');
    //also
TextColumn::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliDateTime(locale: 'np');
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliTime(locale: 'en');
```

| Argument   | Type                              | Default                | Description                           |
| ---------- | --------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `format`   | `string \| Closure \| null`       | default(from filament) | Output format (BS).                   |
| `timezone` | `string \| Closure \| null`       | `null`                 | Timezone for displaying date.         |
| `locale`   | `string('en' or 'np') \| Closure` | `'en'`                 | Language/locale for formatted output. |

---

### `nepaliSince()`

Displays a human-readable difference (e.g., “2 days ago”) between a stored BS date-time and the current time.

```php
TextColumn::make('published_at')
    ->nepaliSince();

```

| Argument   | Type                        | Default | Description                  |
| ---------- | --------------------------- | ------- | ---------------------------- |
| `timezone` | `string \| Closure \| null` | `null`  | Timezone for the comparison. |

---

### `nepaliNumber()`

Converts numbers into Nepali numerals or formatted currency representations.

```php
TextEntry::make('salary')
    ->nepaliNumber(currencySymbol: true, locale: 'np');
```

| Argument         | Type                        | Default | Description                                        |
| ---------------- | --------------------------- | ------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `currencySymbol` | `bool \| Closure \| string` | `false` | Displays the currency symbol (e.g., रू).           |
| `only`           | `bool \| Closure`           | `false` | Appends “Only” to the end of the formatted number. |
| `locale`         | `'en' \| 'np' \| Closure`   | `'en'`  | Output locale for numerals.                        |
| `format`         | `bool \| Closure`           | `true`  | Whether to apply number formatting (commas, etc.). |

---

### `nepaliWord()`

Converts numeric values into Nepali or English words, optionally as currency words.

```php
TextEntry::make('amount')
    ->nepaliWord(locale: 'en');
```

| Argument   | Type                      | Default | Description                                        |
| ---------- | ------------------------- | ------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `currency` | `bool \| Closure`         | `false` | Whether to convert the number into currency words. |
| `only`     | `bool \| Closure`         | `false` | If true, Show Only at the end.                     |
| `locale`   | `'en' \| 'np' \| Closure` | `'en'`  | Language of the output (English or Nepali).        |

---

### `nepaliMoney()`

Formats numeric values as Nepali currency, complete with symbols, localization, and optional unit division.

```php
TextEntry::make('total')
    ->nepaliMoney(currencySymbol: true, divideBy: 100, locale: 'np');
```

| Argument         | Type             | Default | Description                          |
| ---------------- | ---------------- | ------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `currencySymbol` | `bool \| string` | `true`  | Whether to show currency symbol.     |
| `divideBy`       | `int`            | `0`     | Divide numeric value before display. |
| `locale`         | `'en' \| 'np'`   | `'en'`  | Output language.                     |
| `only`           | `bool`           | `true`  | Append “Only” after amount.          |

---

### `nepaliNumeric()`

Display numeric values using Nepali digit formatting (commas, symbols).

```php
TextEntry::make('population')
    ->nepaliNumeric(locale: 'np');
```

| Parameter | Type           | Default | Description      |
| --------- | -------------- | ------- | ---------------- |
| `locale`  | `'en' \| 'np'` | `'en'`  | Output language. |

---

### NepaliFunctions for Tooltip

You can append Tooltip to any Nepali function to display formatted tooltips.

```php
TextColumn::make('created_at')->nepaliSinceTooltip();

```

**For example:**

-   `nepaliDate()` → `nepaliDateTooltip()`
-   `nepaliSince()` → `nepaliSinceTooltip()`
-   `nepaliMoney()` → `nepaliMoneyTooltip()`

---

## Changelog

Please see [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md) for more information on what has changed recently.

## Contributing

Please see [CONTRIBUTING](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Security Vulnerabilities

Please review [our security policy](../../security/policy) on how to report security vulnerabilities.

## Credits

-   [Rohan Adhikari](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1)
<!-- -   [All Contributors](../../contributors) -->

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [License File](LICENSE.md) for more information.

Commit message:

updated doc for disable nav

README.md, after:

# 📅 Filament Nepali Date Time Support

[![Latest Version on Packagist](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime)
[![Filament v4](https://img.shields.io/badge/Filament-v4-ffba00?style=flat-square)](https://filamentphp.com/)
[![Total Downloads](https://img.shields.io/packagist/dt/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime.svg?style=flat-square)](https://packagist.org/packages/rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime)

A FilamentPHP plugin that adds support for Nepali Date (Bikram Sambat - BS) in Filament’s form, infolist and table components.
![Banner](.github/screenshots/banner.jpg)

## Installation

Require the package using Composer:

```bash
composer require rohanadhikari/filament-nepali-datetime
```

---

## Screenshots

### Nepali DateTime Picker in Form

![Nepali DateTime Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-3.png)
![Nepali DateTime Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-4.png)

### Nepali Date Picker in Form

![Nepali Date Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-1.png)
![Nepali Date Picker](.github/screenshots/datepicker-2.png)

### Nepali Functions

![Nepali Functions](.github/screenshots/textentry-1.png)
![Nepali Functions](.github/screenshots/textentry-2.png)

---

## Usage

To use `NepaliDate`, please refer to the documentation of [`NepaliDate`](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1/NepalIDatePHP).

### 1. NepaliDateTimePicker

> [!WARNING]  
> If you are using `timestamp` and `datetime` column type consider using [`ADAsNepaliDate`](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1/NepalIDatePHP/blob/main/docs/LARAVEL.md#cast-attribute-to-nepalidate) cast in model.

It extends Filament [DateTimePicker](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/date-time-picker) to support **Nepali Date (BS)**.

```php
use RohanAdhikari\FilamentNepaliDatetime\NepaliDatetimePicker;
use RohanAdhikari\FilamentNepaliDatetime\NepaliDatePicker;

NepaliDatetimePicker::make('dob')
    ->label('Date of Birth (BS)')
    ->weekStartsOnSaturday()
    ->dehydrateStateInNepali()
    ->locale(NepaliDate::NEPALI)
    ->maxDate(NepaliDate::now())
    ->minDate(now()->subYear(20)), // Suport NepaliDate/ Carbon / Nepalidate string

    //or for date only
NepaliDatePicker::make('dob')
    ->format('d-m-Y')
    ->locale(NepaliDate::NEPALI)
    ->maxDate(NepaliDate::now()),

```

### Configuring the locale

The picker supports two locales:

-   `'en'` – English
-   `'np'` – Nepali

```php
NepaliDatetimePicker::make('dob')
    ->locale(NepaliDate::NEPALI);
```

### Configuring the first day of the week

Similar to [Filament Datetime Picker](https://filamentphp.com/docs/4.x/forms/date-time-picker#configuring-the-first-day-of-the-week). New convenient helper method is added.

```php
NepaliDatePicker::make('dob')
    ->weekStartsOnSaturday()
```

---

### Disable Navigation When Out Of Range

By Default, Navigation is disabled when date is out of range(like after maxdate or before mindate). To enable navigation even Date is Out of Range You can use `->disableNavWhenOutOfRange(false)`.

```php
NepaliDatePicker::make('dob')
    ->disableNavWhenOutOfRange(false)
```

---

### Saving Date in Nepali Format

By Default, Datetime is saved in english format even locale is 'np'. You can configure it to save in **Nepali Unicode** in the database.

> [!WARNING]  
> In Laravel migrations, **don’t use** `timestamp` for Nepali dates. Instead, use `string`, because `timestamp` and `datetime` cannot store Unicode characters.

> [!NOTE]  
> If you are using any cast from [`NepaliDate`](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1/NepalIDatePHP) in model, date will automatically be converted to the English locale.

```php
NepaliDatetimePicker::make('dob')
    ->dehydrateStateInNepali()
```

---

### Methods Supporting NepaliDate

These methods support **NepaliDate**, **Carbon**, or **NepaliDate string**:

| Method                 | Description                                                  | Example Usage                                          |
| ---------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------ |
| `defaultFocusedDate()` | Sets the default date when the picker opens                  | `->defaultFocusedDate(NepaliDate::now())`              |
| `disabledDates()`      | Disables specific dates (array of Carbon/NepaliDate/strings) | `->disabledDates([NepaliDate::now(),now()->addDay()])` |
| `maxDate()`            | Sets the maximum selectable date                             | `->maxDate(NepaliDate::now())`                         |
| `minDate()`            | Sets the minimum selectable date                             | `->minDate(now()->subYear(20))`                        |

---

### DatePicker Key Bindings

The DatePicker supports keyboard navigation for accessibility and ease of use.

#### Navigation

-   **Arrow Left** → Move focus to the previous day
-   **Arrow Right** → Move focus to the next day
-   **Arrow Up** → Move focus to the same week day in the previous week
-   **Arrow Down** → Move focus to the same week day in the next week

#### Month / Year Shortcuts

-   **Alt + Arrow Left** → Focus the previous month
-   **Alt + Arrow Right** → Focus the next month
-   **Alt + Arrow Up** → Focus the previous year
-   **Alt + Arrow Down** → Focus the next year

#### Page Navigation

-   **Page Up** → Previous month
-   **Page Down** → Next month
-   **Shift + Page Up** → Previous year
-   **Shift + Page Down** → Next year

#### Week Navigation

-   **Home** → Jump to the start of the week
-   **End** → Jump to the end of the week

#### Selection & Clearing

-   **Enter** → Select the currently focused day
-   **Backspace / Delete / Clear** → Clear the selected date

---

### 2. Nepali Functions

The following functions are available on TextColumn and TextEntry.

### `nepaliDate()`

Formats a stored **BS (Bikram Sambat)** date into English or Nepali locale.

> [!NOTE]  
> This does **not** convert AD → BS.
> If you want conversion, use [`toNepaliDate()`](#tonepalidate).

```php
TextColumn::make('dob')
    ->nepaliDate(
        locale: 'np'
    );
    //or
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->nepaliDateTime(
        locale: 'en'
    );
        //or
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->nepaliTime(
        locale: 'en'
    );
```

| Argument   | Type                              | Default                | Description                           |
| ---------- | --------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `format`   | `string \| Closure \| null`       | default(from filament) | Output format (BS).                   |
| `timezone` | `string \| Closure \| null`       | `null`                 | Timezone for displaying date.         |
| `locale`   | `string('en' or 'np') \| Closure` | `'en'`                 | Language/locale for formatted output. |

---

### `toNepaliDate()`

Converts a stored AD date into BS date, then formats it.

```php
// Table Column
TextColumn::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliDate(format: 'd M, Y', locale: 'np');
// Infolist Text Entry
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliDate(format: 'd M, Y', locale: 'en');
    //also
TextColumn::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliDateTime(locale: 'np');
TextEntry::make('dob')
    ->toNepaliTime(locale: 'en');
```

| Argument   | Type                              | Default                | Description                           |
| ---------- | --------------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------------- |
| `format`   | `string \| Closure \| null`       | default(from filament) | Output format (BS).                   |
| `timezone` | `string \| Closure \| null`       | `null`                 | Timezone for displaying date.         |
| `locale`   | `string('en' or 'np') \| Closure` | `'en'`                 | Language/locale for formatted output. |

---

### `nepaliSince()`

Displays a human-readable difference (e.g., “2 days ago”) between a stored BS date-time and the current time.

```php
TextColumn::make('published_at')
    ->nepaliSince();

```

| Argument   | Type                        | Default | Description                  |
| ---------- | --------------------------- | ------- | ---------------------------- |
| `timezone` | `string \| Closure \| null` | `null`  | Timezone for the comparison. |

---

### `nepaliNumber()`

Converts numbers into Nepali numerals or formatted currency representations.

```php
TextEntry::make('salary')
    ->nepaliNumber(currencySymbol: true, locale: 'np');
```

| Argument         | Type                        | Default | Description                                        |
| ---------------- | --------------------------- | ------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `currencySymbol` | `bool \| Closure \| string` | `false` | Displays the currency symbol (e.g., रू).           |
| `only`           | `bool \| Closure`           | `false` | Appends “Only” to the end of the formatted number. |
| `locale`         | `'en' \| 'np' \| Closure`   | `'en'`  | Output locale for numerals.                        |
| `format`         | `bool \| Closure`           | `true`  | Whether to apply number formatting (commas, etc.). |

---

### `nepaliWord()`

Converts numeric values into Nepali or English words, optionally as currency words.

```php
TextEntry::make('amount')
    ->nepaliWord(locale: 'en');
```

| Argument   | Type                      | Default | Description                                        |
| ---------- | ------------------------- | ------- | -------------------------------------------------- |
| `currency` | `bool \| Closure`         | `false` | Whether to convert the number into currency words. |
| `only`     | `bool \| Closure`         | `false` | If true, Show Only at the end.                     |
| `locale`   | `'en' \| 'np' \| Closure` | `'en'`  | Language of the output (English or Nepali).        |

---

### `nepaliMoney()`

Formats numeric values as Nepali currency, complete with symbols, localization, and optional unit division.

```php
TextEntry::make('total')
    ->nepaliMoney(currencySymbol: true, divideBy: 100, locale: 'np');
```

| Argument         | Type             | Default | Description                          |
| ---------------- | ---------------- | ------- | ------------------------------------ |
| `currencySymbol` | `bool \| string` | `true`  | Whether to show currency symbol.     |
| `divideBy`       | `int`            | `0`     | Divide numeric value before display. |
| `locale`         | `'en' \| 'np'`   | `'en'`  | Output language.                     |
| `only`           | `bool`           | `true`  | Append “Only” after amount.          |

---

### `nepaliNumeric()`

Display numeric values using Nepali digit formatting (commas, symbols).

```php
TextEntry::make('population')
    ->nepaliNumeric(locale: 'np');
```

| Parameter | Type           | Default | Description      |
| --------- | -------------- | ------- | ---------------- |
| `locale`  | `'en' \| 'np'` | `'en'`  | Output language. |

---

### NepaliFunctions for Tooltip

You can append Tooltip to any Nepali function to display formatted tooltips.

```php
TextColumn::make('created_at')->nepaliSinceTooltip();

```

**For example:**

-   `nepaliDate()` → `nepaliDateTooltip()`
-   `nepaliSince()` → `nepaliSinceTooltip()`
-   `nepaliMoney()` → `nepaliMoneyTooltip()`

---

## Changelog

Please see [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md) for more information on what has changed recently.

## Contributing

Please see [CONTRIBUTING](.github/CONTRIBUTING.md) for details.

## Security Vulnerabilities

Please review [our security policy](../../security/policy) on how to report security vulnerabilities.

## Credits

-   [Rohan Adhikari](https://github.com/rohanAdhikari1)
<!-- -   [All Contributors](../../contributors) -->

## License

The MIT License (MIT). Please see [License File](LICENSE.md) for more information.
